CONTEXT

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder that affects 1% of the population1

. Academically, research on

autism (genetics, molecular, neuroscience, brain imaging and epidemiologic studies) has seen a large

increase over the last fifteen years2

. zttttttttttttatztztetekckkhdhdd
Hypothesis #3: It is possible to improve such a situation by creating an inventory of all initiatives

and evaluate them scientifically in order to diffuse evidence-based information.

There is to our knowledge no systematic method to assess and compare the digital tools for children with

autism Interested by the existing digital tool directories dedicated to autism3,4,5

, I aim to meet the needs of

the users by implementing an additional degree of access to these tools, particularly via a comprehensive

inventory by identifying, classifying and analyzing digital innovations.

OBJECTIVES

I aim to facilitate the transition from conventional, closed scientific inquiry to an open model where anyone

may participate in every stage of a research project including idea conception, project development,

conducting the research and analysis of the results, to create an autism ecosystem bringing together the

various stakeholders (researchers, autistic people, their parents, caregivers, therapists, doctors, technology

developers like programmers and all others interested).

My thesis will be composed of three independent but highly complementary projects, each of them relying

on different methods (citizen science/action research, applied research, fundamental research). The first

project, OCEAN, a citizen science and action research project, is my own project that I developed during

my Masters. It will be backed by fundamental and applied science with my involvement in the MACA project

(lead by F. Cazalis) and the INTERACT project (lead by R. Toro). The research instrument that I will create

is a platform dedicated to research on autism, with three components: web applications, databases and

data analyses. All three projects will share a common structure, numerical tools and, most importantly, the

same open access database, so that results from all three approaches can be analyzed conjointly.

Aim 1: Citizen Science, action research (OCEAN, A. Krishnakumar): Establish a comprehensive

inventory of digital tools and develop a method for their assessment/improvement/diffusion:

As part of my Masters (CRI AIV-M2). I established a pilot website6 and an initial growing database7 of 160

digital innovations for autism with the intent to create a peer based collaboration system among different

stakeholders. The website will be upgraded to explain the project and autism from the viewpoint of different

stakeholders using comic strips, animations and diagrams. A profile system will be developed with the intent

to match one stakeholders’ needs to another’s skills and interests.

Aim 2: Fundamental research (MACA, F. Cazalis): Map autistic cognitive abilities using games,

applications and tools as experimental tasks: Cognition in autism is characterized by a specific

combination of impairments and abilities. Abilities in autism, however, are less studied8

. Heterogeneity in

autism limits research based on conventional paradigms. The project aims at a systematic cartography of

OCEAN

both cognitive-perceptual abilities and impairments in autism. Gamification of psychological tasks

(experimental tasks as video games) promotes optimal performance, enabling measurements of both

hyper-competences and deficits. Individuals with severe forms of autism (45% of this population, hitherto

under-studied) could be included who, despite their difficulties, are able to use smartphones or tablets.

Aim 3: Applied research (INTERACT, R. Toro): Develop games, applications and tools by

programming and design students in collaboration with researchers, therapists, parents, doctors and other

professionals. In the current cycle, four apps are under development (see work plan) along with a

backend/database support system for the creation of subsequent applications.

WORK PLAN

SUPERVISION and COLLABORATIONS

F. Cazalis (CNRS-EHESS) - director, A. Klein (Sage Bionetworks) - co-director.

A. Lindner (CRI, INSERM), R. Toro (Institut Pasteur), F. X. Petit - head teacher of Ecole 42 (School of

Computer Science) whose students participate in the development of OCEAN.

METHODS

I propose a novel approach that uses games, tools and applications developed with the active involvement

of the autism community itself to collect data largely from home and school settings. Classic implements

such as surveys could also be administered remotely. More interestingly, sensors such as accelerometers,

gyroscopes, and microphones can provide data with minimal or no interruption in the participant’s daily life.

The impact of high-resolution activity data collected from smartphones is only beginning to be explored.

Smartphones and other networked devices offer a unique opportunity to engage research participants

without requiring physical interaction. The feasibility of using smartphones as new tools in the management

and understanding of diseases was demonstrated by the mPower Parkinson study by Sage Bionetworks9

.

The intent is to create a platform that concatenates the three parts of the project: (I) Citizen Science (II)

Fundamental Research (III) Applied Research. Each part will be 3-tiered: web applications, databases and

data analyses.

(I) Citizen Science: The OCEAN database identifies, classifies and analyses projects making them

available for citizens and researchers alike. It already has 160 projects, games, tools and apps and

community efforts. For its expansion and its data validation, the following steps will be undertaken (i) Forms

will be sent to the respective teams that satisfy the inclusion criteria. (ii) The teams would verify or update

the data in the prescribed format and provide information including a project synopsis linked to a Wiki. (iii)

After validation by a scientific committee, the project would feature on the database. (iv) A form will be

available to enter new projects, feeding the database. (v) A platform will be provided to add further content,

enable blogging and to share ideas/suggestions. People interested in an area (eg. social interaction) will

be directed to the relevant projects, initiatives and related stakeholders by a tag-based system. A profile

system (Interconnect) will have information on experiences (what works and what does not), expertise

(skills, contributions - time and/or resources) and suggested solutions, ideas and hypotheses of

stakeholders. I will develop an engagement map comparing problems faced and the resources used with

initial focus on parents in France and India.

(II) Fundamental Research: The MACA project relies on online gamified experimental tasks, aiming at

measuring cognitive and perceptual abilities. The tasks’ performance will be analyzed in order to identify,

describe and compare cognitive functions between autistic individuals and matched control groups.

Participants will contribute not only to the formulation of scientific hypotheses but also to the analysis of

results and scientific discussion. Games are meant to engage the user giving us the opportunity to gather

behavioral data such as duration of play, reaction times and game scores. Additionally libraries will be

provided for the analysis of face geometry, eye tracking and audio and motion analysis (via the

accelerometers built into modern smartphones and tablets). The platform will include an online gamification

software Redwire10 for the creation of experimental tasks and its associated database Redmetrics11 that

are currently under open source development. Three pilot gamified tasks ‘My way’12, ‘hungry animals train’13

and ‘blinking eyes’14 have been produced and beta-tested.

(III) Applied Research: The INTERACT project relies on open-source, evidence-based creation learning

apps and tools targeted at children with severe autism, their parents and caretakers. Three apps are

currently under development: Ma-voix will be a vocabulary building app and communication tool using the

principles of picture exchange communication systems. Ma-nuit will obtain data on patterns, cycles and

movements produced in sleep in autists. Mon-quotidien will be used to record daily observations and

activities in a specific format to monitor the child’s progress across different dimensions enabling

OCEAN

introspection by parents/caregivers and suggestions from experts. In addition, Site-web will provide up-to-
date information on autism research, behavioral and educational interventions and will be for parents to

keep track of behavioral milestones. The INTERACT Database is an open, anonymous repository to harvest

user data gathered through the API inserted in all games, applications and digital tools. It will be able to

store large amounts of data in a generic fashion, allowing access for both web applications to connect to it

in an open manner. The data-analysis API will allow expert users to access all data for its mining and

modelling. In addition, a web interface would be developed providing simple, interactive data visualization

and analysis tools for basic inferential statistics. These tools will allow non-specialists also to study the data.

In particular, the web interface would allow individuals to compare their own data with those of other users.

The data analysis could characterize the cognitive-perceptual fluctuations and establish correlations (or

lack thereof) between diagnostic, qualitative and quantitative data wherever applicable, and detect distinct

patterns in the combinations of abilities and impairments, namely identification of cognitive phenotypes.

Platform to engage a large community

All web applications would be linked to an interdisciplinary platform for people to actively propose ideas,

discuss observations and test hypotheses. All data, updates, progress and results from the various groups

will be posted on the open platform. The tools ‘Idea-weave’

15 and ‘ECDYS-autism’ developed by our

collaborators will be used for the purpose.

ETHICS

Experimental methods and consent forms will be submitted to the local ethics committee for approval. The

databases will be declared to the CNIL16 (Commission nationale de l'informatique et des libertés).

FEASIBILITY AND INNOVATIVE CHARACTER

Feasibility: Although the OCEAN project is ambitious, its feasibility has been shown by my work with

project stakeholders whose academic and scientific soundness is well established. The CRI will provide IT

resources, particularly through its GameLab17, and HR by two CRI software developers involved in the

project, and the contribution of the students of the Ecole 42 and Ecole Conde (design school). My efforts

as community and project manager are currently being demonstrated in my six-month internship at Ecole

42, in collaboration with the Pasteur Institute, Ecole Conde (School of Design) and Creative Valley

(incubator) and this partnership will continue in my PhD. The seed money of 15000 euros won from the

CRI-AIV Innovative Project Challenge will be used to employ developers and designers to outsource work

on the project platform. The feasibility of MACA and INTERACT are currently being demonstrated through

pilot studies.

Innovative character of OCEAN: OCEAN is in its design a translational research project, based on civic

and participatory research. Located at the interface between research, users and citizens, it is an online

platform that aims to identify, evaluate, finalize and disseminate all open access digital tools to the autism

community. In the evaluation of the effectiveness of tools identified, ‘1’ will be based on estimates reported

by users (usage and satisfaction rating), ‘2’ on objective measures (global scales on quality of life,

appropriate scales such as scales on acquisition of communication through pictograms), ‘3’ on quality of

scientific foundations that have underpinned their design, ‘4’ on IT quality (ergonomics, platforms, scalable

tools) and ‘5’ the opinions of scientists involved.

POTENTIAL OUTCOMES / FUTURE AIMS

Expected impacts are threefold in this regard: modeling of autistic intelligence; better integration of autistic

individuals in school, work and society and enhanced self-perception in autistic individuals.

Interdisciplinary teams would be formed with researchers, therapists, parents, teachers and programmers

etc. emphasizing

(1) Personalized games, tools and apps for a child: In this parent-initiated scheme, a feedback loop

would be created monitoring the child’s progress with a specific focus on matching parent’s suggestions to

programmers’ skills. The code used to build the game would be open source. Upon data analysis, approved

suggestions would be implemented.

(2) Behavioral data from home and school settings: In this researcher-initiated scheme, direct data

collection (and feedback) from parents, caregivers and the community would gather real-time information

for the very large cohorts required by research.

(3) Citizen science: This community-initiated scheme involves creating variants or developing existing

efforts and extending autism-related activities facilitating pooling of resources.

(4) Cognitive science: A cognitive phenotype-based taxonomy engaging a broad community of

researchers in the development of predictive models to help people with autism.hello
